The Financial
Times Guide
to Business
Development
How to win profitable customers and clients




Ian Cooper
Pearson Education Limited

Edinburgh Gate
Harlow CM20 2JE
Tel: +44 (0)1279 623623
Fax: +44 (0)1279 431059
Website: www.pearson.com/uk

First published in Great Britain in 2012

© Ian Cooper 2012

The right of Ian Cooper to be identified as author of this work has been asserted by him in
accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.

Pearson Education is not responsible for the content of third-party internet sites.

ISBN: 978-0-273-75953-9

British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Cooper, Ian.
  The Financial times guide to business development : how to win profitable
customers and clients / Ian Cooper.
    p. cm.
  Includes index.
  ISBN 978-0-273-75953-9 (limp)
 1. Business planning. I. Title.
  HD30.28.C6632 2012
  658.4’01--dc23
                                        2012008814

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system,
or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording
or otherwise, without either the prior written permission of the publisher or a licence
permitting restricted copying in the United Kingdom issued by the Copyright Licensing
Agency Ltd, Saffron House, 6–10 Kirby Street, London EC1N 8TS. This book may not be lent,
resold, hired out or otherwise disposed of by way of trade in any form of binding or cover
other than that in which it is published, without the prior consent of the Publishers.

All trademarks used herein are the property of their respective owners. The use of any
trademark in this text does not vest in the author or publisher any trademark ownership
rights in such trademarks, nor does the use of such trademarks imply any affiliation with or
endorsement of this book by such owners.

The Financial Times. With a worldwide network of highly respected journalists, The
Financial Times provides global business news, insightful opinion and expert analysis
of business, finance and politics. With over 500 journalists reporting from 50 countries
worldwide, our in-depth coverage of international news is objectively reported and
analysed from an independent, global perspective. To find out more, visit
www.ft.com/pearsonoffer.

10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
16 15 14 13 12

Typeset in 9/13pt ITC Stone Serif Std by 3
Printed and bound by Ashford Colour Press, Gosport
To my kids . . . Samantha, Howard, David and the next generation . . . they make
all the business development efforts worthwhile!
Contents



     Acknowledgements / xiii
     Introduction / xv

 1   The 21 commonsense business development truths / 1
     1. Focus on converting leads, not just on generating them / 3
     2. Exceed customer or client expectations / 4
     3. Speak to potential customers or clients . . . and speak to them
        nicely / 6
     4. Be open for business / 8
     5. Don’t let your admin get in the way / 9
     6. There’s no job more important than helping customers or
        clients part with their cash! / 10
     7. Don’t let technology get in the way / 10
     8. Quality and word-of-mouth count for everything / 11
     9. Actively strive for consistency / 12
     10. Recruitment is part of business development / 12
     11. Keep in touch with your existing and past customers and
         clients / 13
     12. Master social online media / 13
     13. Test your ideas, concepts and prices / 14
     14. Plan, but keep things simple / 15
     15. Take complaints seriously / 15
     16. Make your customer or client environment appropriate / 16
     17. Train your people to spot opportunities / 17
x   Contents




           18. Get out of your office or premises and mix and mingle / 17
           19. Find a niche and specialise / 18
           20. Model what works best / 19
           21. Be squeaky clean – you need to be trusted / 19
      2    Asking the right business questions: a toolkit for business
           development / 21
           The five impact questions / 22
           The 100 business development questions / 24
      3    The 20 business development pricing tools, truths and
           techniques / 31
           1. Winning business is not the most important thing – being
              profitable is / 32
           2. Price is a communications issue, not a financial or
              accounting one / 33
           3. Focus on value and service and not just price / 33
           4. Bundle in and include as much as you can / 35
           5. Unbundle and charge things separately / 36
           6. Don’t fall into the price trap / 37
           7. Consider increasing your prices / 37
           8. Use division and comparison / 38
           9. Get others to justify your prices / 39
           10. Price with guarantees / 39
           11. Price for specialisation / 40
           12. Price for profile and experience / 41
           13. Price based on feedback and testing / 42
           14. Price for prestige / 44
           15. Price for know how / 45
           16. Price with the competition in mind / 46
           17. If you must have a loss leader, make it count! / 46
           18. Consider special deals, promotions, sales and discounts / 47
                                                             Contents   xi




    19. Price for easy payment / 48
    20. Price with magic numbers / 49
4   Introducing the business development priorities / 51
    Priority 1 – Convert leads, opportunities and enquiries into
    profitable business / 52
    Priority 2 – Develop more business from existing customers and
    clients / 55
    Priority 3 – Externalise business development efforts to generate
    new leads, opportunities and enquiries / 57
5   Priority 1 – Convert leads, opportunities and enquiries into
    profitable business / 59
    The 10 commandments of converting leads and enquiries / 62
    The five-step conversion process / 71
    General tips on handling leads and enquiries / 76
6   Priority 2 – Develop more business from existing customers
    and clients / 79
    Golden rule 1 – Know your customers and clients / 80
    Golden rule 2 – Keep your customers and clients happy / 81
    Golden rule 3 – Keep in touch with your customers and
    clients / 89
    Golden rule 4 – Offer additional products and services / 92
    Golden rule 5 – Get customers and clients to recommend and
    refer / 95
7   Priority 3 – Externalise business development efforts to
    generate new leads, opportunities and enquiries / 99
    The internet: the commonsense guide to developing your
    business online / 100
    14 ways to develop your business through joint ventures and
    collaboration / 114
    How to win in competitive situations / 118
    Brand your way to business development success / 125
    Direct targeting by telephone / 129
xii   Contents




        8    Personal performance business development skills / 135
             Sales skills and tips / 136
             Writing skills and tips / 140
             Conversational networking skills and tips / 143
             Presentation skills and tips / 146
             Negotiation skills and tips / 150
             Time management skills and tips / 152
        9    Pulling it all together . . . making it happen / 161
             Beware of planning madness / 162
             Know what to do first / 162
             Create some ‘have to’ targets / 162
             Hit your targets by working backwards / 163
             Provide strong leadership and involve others / 164
             Stop putting things off / 164

             Conclusion / 167
             Index / 169
Acknowledgements



I would like to express my sincere gratitude to the many people who have
played a part in influencing and shaping this project.

To Liz Gooster who first approached me about writing this book; Elie
Williams from Pearson for all her skilful input and clarity of understanding;
and Heather Townsend, author of The Financial Times Guide to Business
Networking, for her patient advice on social media topics . . . my grateful
and sincere thanks. Additional thanks for their skill, patience and input to
Helen Savill, Linda Dhondy, Viv Church, Lucy Carter, Anna Jackson and
Isobel McLean who make up the Pearson team.

I would also like to say a big thank you to Wendy Atkin-Smith from Viking
River Cruises, Gary Book from the Leeds Building Society, Jonathan Straight
of Straight plc, Craig Holt from QualitySolicitors, Mario Fijalkowski of
Coronos Playa Hotel, Lanzarote, Michael McInerney of the Merton Hotel,
Jersey and Sara Kahn of Sharkey’s Cuts for Kids, all of whom were generous
with their time, comments and strategies. My thanks too to John Goodman
of US-based TARP Worldwide for permission to use some of its research
information.

On a much more personal level, yet again I want to publicly say a huge
thank you to my wife Helene, for all her endless encouragement, love,
patience and practical support during my time working on this project.
An opening bit of food for
thought!



Knowing something, isn’t the same as deciding to do something!

Deciding to do something, isn’t the same as actually doing it!

Doing it, isn’t the same as doing it well!

Ian Cooper
Introduction



In September 2010 I got an e-mail from my publishers, which read, ‘Ian, I
wonder if you might be interested in writing The Financial Times Guide to
Business Development? If so let’s have a chat.’ Despite being a little flattered
by the idea, believe it or not the rational part of my brain screamed out,
‘No . . . not again.’ I’d written several books before, done the early morning
writing shifts and promised my wife, myself, my computer-typing finger
and my bad back that I had quit. As you can see, however, the temptation
was too great!

I started to ask myself why I should write such a book. What could I con-
tribute that was really different? What do business readers really want?
After spending several weeks thinking about these questions and asking
many business people about their likes and dislikes in existing business
development information, I eventually took up the offer of a ‘chat’ and
explained my concept. If I were to go ahead, I said, I would produce a busi-
ness development success book with a difference. I wanted to write one
that would:

■■ be engaging, down to earth and entertaining to read and full of
   simple, commonsense pragmatism, rather than just academic business
   theory;
■■ inspire aspirational readers from businesses of all sizes and sectors to
   be ‘more profitable’ rather than just ‘better educated and smarter’;
■■ provide some real step-by-step priorities, tools and usable techniques;

■■ have a realistic regard for business development spending power,
   as many readers from small businesses simply want to know how to
   make a little budget go a long way;
■■ be provocative, honest and challenging where needed;

■■ highlight real examples of outstanding business development practice
   in action and also flag up examples of plain commercial silliness to
   avoid;
xvi   Introduction




      ■■ be well structured so that it could either be read in individual sections
         or viewed as a whole;
      ■■ motivate, inspire and act as a catalyst for really effective action;

      ■■ ‘join the dots’ between other specialist books. (My research showed
         that most business development books focus on specific topics. I
         wanted to create one that would be comprehensive and pull all the
         major issues together into one publication.)

      Luckily, the publishers were happy to go along with my vision and so my
      early morning writing shifts began again . . . as did my aching back!

      Jump forward to the present and you now have the opportunity to read The
      Financial Times Guide to Business Development: How to win profitable customers
      and clients, the most comprehensive collection of commonsense business
      development techniques ever, all brought together into one book.

      Regardless of your business sector or size, whether you are a budding entre-
      preneur, existing business owner, manager or director, or an individual
      providing a service of some sort, this is ‘the’ definitive business develop-
      ment ‘how to’ book. It’s aimed at busy, ambitious business people who
      make decisions, have to live with the consequences of their results and are
      hungry for more revenue, profits and business success.

      I am 100 per cent confident that you will find this book engaging, provoca-
      tive and informative, and that if you follow the steps you will automatically
      experience massive improvements in your business development results.

      Read, understand, smile and take effective action!
    1
    The 21 commonsense business
    development truths




As readers of this book you will be preoccupied with
questions such as these:
    ■■ How do we win more customers or clients?

    ■■ How do we generate more profit with a small or limited budget?

    ■■ How can we develop our business without having to win any new customers
       or clients?
    ■■ Why is it that our competitors seem to be doing better than us?

    ■■ What do we have to do to be more successful?



    Let me be very clear about this from the outset. This book is not just about
    winning brand new customers. In my business development world, it is
    also very much about getting existing customers and clients to do more
    business with you and maximising the commercial leads and business
    opportunities that you already have. With this in mind many sections of
    the book are devoted to these issues.

    By the time you have read and digested more than 650 tips, techniques, key
    questions and supportive tools in this book, you will have the answers to all
    the questions above and know what to do to get bigger and better results.
    However, before you start there is one other fundamental thing you must
    understand about this subject and my approach to it.
2   The Financial Times Guide to Business Development




    Business development is about much more than just marketing, sales,
    pitching, online wizardry, mailings, advertising, branding, social media
    strategies, glossy brochures, discount deals, promotional gimmicks or
    special events. Every single thing a business does has a potential impact
    on business development. You are doing it all the time. You shouldn’t be
    thinking ‘Today I’ll do some business development, but tomorrow I’ll focus
    on some other aspect of the business.’ It is all part of the same process
    with the shared objective of moving your business forward towards its
    targeted commercial objectives.

    Whatever your size or sector, if you have HR people, an operations depart-
    ment, a helpline support unit, a training team, members of staff who help
    out part time answering your phone, customer services and complaints
    folk, retail assistants or other support staff . . . they are all in reality part
    of your business development team. Yes, their job description might say
    something else, but they all represent you and your business in some way.
    If you want to develop your business, win more profitable customers and
    clients and keep them coming back for more, then you must understand
    the importance of this integration. You must also make absolutely sure
    that everyone in your organisation knows it too and realises the very real
    contribution that they make to your overall success.

    All your staff need to appreciate with total clarity that it is your customers
    and clients – actually their customers and clients – who ultimately pay their
    wages, and not you.

    This is just one of many simple business development essentials that can
    sometimes be overlooked by the smartest and most creative business develop-
    ment people working in the fast-paced cut and thrust of daily business life.

    With this concept in mind, before we look at a whole range of practical
    business development and business winning activities, which will answer
    all the questions above and give you the results you are looking for, I want
    to address what I call the 21 commonsense business development truths. These
    are the basics you must have in place.

    It’s as simple as this: the more of these ‘truths’ you are getting right, the
    more successful you will be and, conversely, the more of these you are
    falling down on, the more business you will fail to win. After these basic
    truths, almost everything else is mere detail. They are the ingredients of
    your business development success recipe.

    I make no apologies for how obvious, simple and even clichéd some of
    these truths are. After 31 years of working with over 800 businesses, I can
                                  1 ■ The 21 commonsense business development truths              3




   tell you, it isn’t only what you know on an intellectual level that counts,
   it’s also about whether your business is actually doing the things that you
   know it should be, on the ‘front line’. As I go through these commonsense
   ‘truths’ in an observational and anecdotal way, and as you smile and em-
   pathise with many of the situations and scenarios, I urge you to keep an
   open and honest mind and seriously consider these questions:

   ■■ Could that be us?

   ■■ Are we actually doing what we know?

   ■■ How can we tell if we have a problem in these areas?

   ■■ What can we do to put things right?

   ■■ How much are we losing each year that we could win?

   So, let’s get going with the 21 truths.



1. Focus on converting leads, not just on
generating them
     Partners in a law firm attending a seminar of mine told me that for just one of their ser-
     vices they had attracted 586 telephone enquiries from potential clients in the previous
     year through their costly business development activities. However, they explained,
     they turned only 13 per cent into business and they were losing money. What did
     they do about this? They asked me to help them with their business development . . .
     to generate more enquiries!




   Instead I encouraged them to re-define their priorities and to look at how
   their enquiries were dealt with. Here is what I found: the enquiries were
   dealt with badly, by bored untrained staff, who treated potential clients
   as though they were a nuisance. The callers, who were often emotionally
   distressed, were processed through a largely irrelevant legal administrative
   questionnaire that neither caller nor call handler fully understood.

   There was no real conversation, no rapport built up or interest shown in the
   caller’s situation. No helpful information was offered, little follow-up was
   done and not one of the call handlers thought to ask if the potential client
   wanted to go ahead. The only surprising thing is that they got as much as
   a 13 per cent conversion rate. I guess some callers were just plain desperate.

   I was able to help the partners in the firm recognise that the real problem
   was not their lack of leads but the total absence of attention and focus on
4   The Financial Times Guide to Business Development




    the efficient and effective handling of enquiries. I showed them a new and
    proper structure for this, changed the methods of call handling and gave
    the relevant personnel some guidance and training.

    Six months later, with no money spent at all on external business develop-
    ment or marketing activities, this legal practice was converting 82 per cent
    of exactly the same type of enquiries into profitable business. In financial
    terms this was worth an extra £404,340 per year.

    How much are you losing each year by overlooking this commonsense
    truth?

    I will be looking in much more detail at this issue later in the book and
    providing special techniques and guidance which have the potential to give
    you some equally massive improvements (see Chapter 5).



2. Exceed customer or client expectations
    Let me ask you a really simple question. Can you instantly name three
    occasions in your life when an organisation you’ve done business with has
    massively exceeded your expectations? I don’t just mean delivered on its
    promises and done a good job, but consciously given you a positive and
    excited feeling that it has gone way past what you expected.

    Have you immediately got three names in your head? Actually have you
    got one?

    Despite the clichéd mantra of many corporate leaders and executives, that
    ‘we strive to exceed customer expectations’, when I have asked people this
    question, very few have quickly been able to come up with three really
    great examples.

    To be blunt, it is a business development truth that exceeding customer or
    client expectations is not as common as it should be, regardless of the fact
    that it really is the holy grail of sustained business success. If, as a business,
    you can consistently exceed customer/client expectations, then subject to
    market factors you are able to charge premium prices in your sector, get
    very high levels of repeat business and fantastic word-of-mouth referrals.

    By the way, I can’t immediately think of three answers either, but I can
    think of one. My wife and I recently took a holiday to China with a
    company called Viking River Cruises. No prizes for guessing what business
    they are in! Not only was the overall trip as good as we had hoped, but it
    totally exceeded our wildest expectations in every possible respect and was
                           1 ■ The 21 commonsense business development truths       5




an absolute ‘masterclass’ in customer service. This was not just my opinion,
I spoke to a very large number of other passengers who felt exactly the
same.

Now before I get too carried away sharing my personal holiday experiences,
my interest as a business writer is in how Viking River Cruises manages to
achieve what so few businesses are able to do. What is the strategic thinking
and activity that makes these high business aspirations a reality? What
lessons can other businesses of all types learn from Viking? With these
questions in mind I spoke to the company’s UK managing director Wendy
Atkin-Smith.

She gave me several answers, all of which can be conceptually modelled:

■■ ‘We track feedback on everything, even the small details. For example,
   we spent a huge amount of time recently just reviewing and discussing
   the quality and appearance of our crockery and cutlery.’
■■ ‘We deliberately don’t oversell in our brochures, in fact we consciously
   undersell. We want people to be surprised when they get even more
   than they had expected.’
■■ ‘We find the best people, look after them and pay them well.
   Excellence starts with recruitment. We identify people at the outset
   who are prepared to go the extra mile.’
■■ ‘We like to keep control over every aspect of what we do and we never
   give anything out to third parties. All elements are controlled and
   staffed by Viking River Cruises trained people, even if they are based
   locally.’
■■ ‘The overall Viking ethos is about exceeding customer expectations
   and in training we are massively passionate about customer service.’

There are two other factors I would like to mention that show how seriously
this company takes this issue and commitment. Firstly it communicates
and builds its aims into its branding. With its registered strap line, Viking
River Cruises . . . The World’s Leading River Cruise Line . . . By Far®, it imme-
diately and very publicly establishes, both externally and internally, high
standards to achieve. If you set such standards and targets in the first place,
you are more likely to achieve them than by setting no standards!

I was also intrigued and impressed with the passenger feedback sheets
given out at the end of the trip. Gone were the usual questions and boxes
to tick, inviting holidaymakers to select excellent, good, average or poor.
The whole of Viking’s evaluation process was based around questions
6   The Financial Times Guide to Business Development




    that matched its branding and ethos. Viking asks passengers to indicate
    whether the experience was ‘far above expectations’, ‘above expectations’,
    ‘as expected’, etc.

    What can you learn from all this that you can use in your own business
    development? (See Chapter 6, golden rule 2 for advice on getting your
    service standards right.)



3. Speak to potential customers or clients . . .
and speak to them nicely
       Picture the scene. After several years of driving the same car that was getting worn
       out and cranky (a bit like its owner), I decided it was time for a change. So off I went
       car shopping. I went to four dealerships in the space of one morning. Between them,
       all of these manufacturers spend millions trying to get prospective car buyers like me
       to think about them and then to go and look at their vehicles. Here’s what happened.




    Dealer 1 told me, ‘We have a special promotional event on this weekend so
    we can’t spend much time with you . . . but you can have a glass of cham-
    pagne.’ Not a total waste of time then!

    Dealers 2 and 3 ignored me totally. Although I walked around the show-
    room and forecourt in my most interested, potential car buying manner,
    getting in and out of cars and reading information and price labels, aston-
    ishingly, nobody approached me. After a full 15 minutes at each dealership
    none of the salespeople had spoken to me at all. This was despite the fact
    that in both dealerships there were at least three sales executives sitting
    alone at their impressive desks with a pile of business cards in front of
    them, no doubt doing something important.

    At dealer 4’s showroom I must have made customer service sales history.
    I got thrown out of its showroom trying to buy a car! Yes . . . I was shown
    the ‘red card’. What was my crime? Did I try to steal a car or spill my lunch
    over the plush leather seating? No, here is what happened and how the
    conversation went.

    ‘How much is that car over there? There is no price on the windscreen.’

    ‘Sold,’ came back the reply.

    ‘How about that one then?’

    ‘Sold,’ he replied again as he turned to walk off back to his desk.
                               1 ■ The 21 commonsense business development truths           7




‘Perhaps you could take my contact details down, with what I am looking
for, so you could get back to me when you have something that matches,’ I
very politely and helpfully suggested.

‘I don’t need you to tell me how to do my job . . . just get out,’ he shouted
aggressively, pointing to the door.

Guess what? I didn’t need telling twice. I did leave, but it won’t surprise
you to know that when I did eventually buy a vehicle, it was not of course
from him or that dealership. Nevertheless, he wins the prize for being the
best salesman of my car buying morning. Unlike the other dealers, at least
he made conversation with me . . . well, all 17 words of it. The only problem
was that two of them were ‘get out’!

Remember, ‘people buy people’ first. What are yours like at dealing with
your customers and clients?

Now let me give you a positive example of how to get things right and the
impact this can have on business development.


   My wife and I were considering which of many financial organisations to choose for a
   particular bit of business. We had dealt with many in the past with varying degrees of
   satisfaction. After several telephone calls, which had us selecting endless recorded
   options, being put on ‘hold’ for an unacceptable amount of time, being grilled exces-
   sively with security questions, only to be put through to people who were unhelpful
   and who lacked product knowledge or communications skills, we tried the Leeds
   Building Society. Here is what happened.




The number we dialled connected us immediately with a real person at the
branch. The young woman we spoke to was helpful, clear and instantly able
to answer our questions knowledgeably. As a result, we arranged to call in
that morning to discuss taking things further with her and she told us what
we would need to bring with us.

On arrival, though she was busy with another customer, she politely
excused herself for a moment to greet us and introduced us to the branch
manager who was available to help.

He was friendly, had excellent interpersonal skills, was respectful, asked the
right questions, made us feel like he was interested in doing business with
us, had good knowledge of his product range, was able to answer our ques-
tions without jargon and put no needless obstacles in the way. The result:
we did business with the Leeds Building Society and now we tell others
how excellent it is.
8   The Financial Times Guide to Business Development




    Though the manager’s job description probably doesn’t mention business
    development in any formal sense, everything he and his colleagues did is
    a great example of business development. Gary Brook, Head of Corporate
    Communication at the Leeds Building Society, talks about how this way
    of dealing with customers is ‘embedded in our culture’. To ensure that the
    good intentions are translated into sustained standards he explained:

    ‘The Society carries out a number of external exercises to monitor service,
    obtain feedback and understand customer sentiment. These include mystery
    shop exercises, independent customer surveys, staff opinion surveys,
    product surveys and a range of forums including those for branch managers
    on the issue of treating customers fairly.’

    For more information on what you can do, see Chapter 6, golden rule 2.



4. Be open for business
       The managing director of a successful business told me recently how he rang a five
       star hotel, part of a major chain, that considered itself to be one of the most elegant
       and luxurious hotels in London, to make a reservation.
       He was told by a receptionist to whom he got through that: ‘Reservation staff don’t
       work on Sundays so you can’t book today.’ End of call!
       ‘I booked with another hotel,’ he told me.




    Let’s get this straight. This is a nonsense. I don’t know what this organisa-
    tion’s promotional budget is, but it seems to me that turning away people
    who actively want to spend money with it, then and there, makes a
    mockery out of its business development efforts and spend.

    The basic questions then are: how do your opening hours impact on
    your business? What do you do to cover lunch and breaks? What time
    do you close in the evening? When do your potential customers or
    clients want to contact you and do business? What do your competi-
    tors do? How can you adapt to the buying habits of your customers or
    clients?

    These are serious business development issues. Don’t ignore them. I am,
    of course, aware of and sympathetic to internal lunchtime staffing rotas,
    the logistical problems faced by small and growing businesses and the
    ‘work–life’ balance issue. However, it is undeniable that accessibility and
    availability are basic business development truths. If you are closed when
                                   1 ■ The 21 commonsense business development truths          9




   your customers and clients want to buy from you, don’t be surprised if you
   lose business to your competitors who are open for business.



5. Don’t let your admin get in the way
      I recently took a phone call from the conference manager of a major hotel chain . . .
      a brand name that everyone in the world would recognise. This manager wanted me
      to complete an administrative form relating to how I would pay for an event that I was
      speaking at, which my seminar business was organising and holding in his hotel.
      Unfortunately I was travelling and thus unable to complete the form then and there.
      As a result of this the manager seemed overcome with an administrative spasm. ‘I
      need that form and we can’t go ahead with the event without it,’ he said. Here is the
      rest of the conversation in summary:
      ‘No problem,’ I said. ‘To give you total peace of mind, although I can’t complete the
      form right now, I’ll pay everything upfront with my credit card, so you don’t need to
      worry about it.’
      ‘No, it’s not about getting the money . . . it’s about getting the form back.’
      ‘I understand that, and as soon as I get back to the office later this evening I will
      complete all the paperwork and send it through to you. Actually, right now getting all
      the money in advance is even better for you than the paperwork.’
      ‘The money is not important to me,’ he said.




   How many of your people tell customers and clients that paying ‘is not
   important’?

   The fact of the matter is that every business, regardless of its size, will have
   its administrative processes, procedures and systems. That is absolutely
   fine, indeed it makes sense to do whatever is necessary to streamline the
   delivery of service. However, where the processing becomes more impor-
   tant than the commercial objectives of the business itself, then there is a
   problem.

   In this instance the conference manager was purely task driven about
   getting back his form. To him this process was more important than getting
   paid.

   Remember, you are not in business to fulfil and justify your administrative
   tasks. They are merely a stepping-stone to more important goals.
10   The Financial Times Guide to Business Development




6. There’s no job more important than helping
customers or clients part with their cash!

        One of my seminar delegates, a company director, shared a recent clothes shopping
        experience with me. She told me how at 4.30 pm she had walked into the fitting room
        of a national retail chain to try on two items of clothing. A member of staff stopped her
        and said, ‘Sorry, you can’t try those on.’ ‘Why not?’ asked my delegate. ‘Because I
        have other jobs to attend to here in the fitting room area before we close.’




     If I was being very charitable, perhaps this might be understandable and
     justifiable at 4.55 pm if the store closes at 5 pm. At 4.30 pm, however,
     with a full half hour to go there is absolutely no justification for turning a
     potential customer away. Apart from any lost revenue from those purchases
     it does nothing for customer service.

     Whatever jobs the store member of staff had to perform, nothing was more
     important than helping or indeed allowing a potential customer to make a
     purchase. Never forget, it is your customers and clients who pay the wages,
     and not the company.



7. Don’t let technology get in the way

        I once found myself in a US-style restaurant diner. I had met with a client for coffee
        and by 11.45 am we had pretty much finished and fancied some food. We were told
        we couldn’t order anything, because ‘We enter your choice of food onto our hand
        held terminals . . . and the computers don’t let us take orders until 12 noon.’ Simple:
        we left and bought an early lunch elsewhere.



     How often have you been faced with ‘the computer is down’ or ‘the com-
     puter says no’ excuse? How does this make you feel as a potential customer
     or client?

     While many do what we did in this example and buy elsewhere, there are
     still many consumers who reluctantly accept that this is okay. It is not!
     Nor is it acceptable from a business point of view. If you are aware of ‘tech-
     nology excuses’ happening in your business, then do something about it,
     before you lose customers.

     Making use of modern technology or computer systems to enhance effi-
     ciency is to be supported, but if for any reason you have a problem with
     your technology or you have a customer or client who wants something
                                    1 ■ The 21 commonsense business development truths               11




   outside of the norm . . . like an early lunch . . . then encourage your team to
   be flexible and to find a way of making it happen. For example, the diner
   mentioned above could have made an exception and made us the food first
   and generated the order afterwards, once its systems were up and running.
   This may have been different for the staff, but it would certainly have been
   more profitable than saying no.

   If you are an owner or a manager, empower your staff to use their initiative
   to stop technology being an obstacle to doing business.



8. Quality and word-of-mouth count for
everything
      A restaurant owner acquired new premises in a fantastic location. He spent a huge
      sum fitting it out with beautiful furnishings and décor and created a wonderfully com-
      prehensive menu, which was appropriately themed and tastefully printed. Everything
      was polished and brand spanking new, ready for the big launch. There had been lots
      of promotion to get diners in during the opening few weeks and there was a real buzz
      of expectation locally. Everything was perfect, except for just two things . . . the quality
      of the food and the service.
      Everyone who went there had a bad experience. Negative word of mouth was the
      norm. Stories were told of inefficient service, long waits, items on the menu not
      available, mistakes made over orders and finally food poisoning. As a business, the
      restaurant did not last long.
      Despite all the preparation and cosmetic attention to the décor and premises, ulti-
      mately the poor quality of the product and service contributed to the demise of this
      restaurant and indeed the owner’s business aspirations.




   The moral of the story is simple. If you want to be successful you have to
   be absolutely committed to quality. It isn’t enough to pay lip service to it. It
   has to be of paramount importance. Forget business development activities
   altogether if you have a lousy product or service.

   One other point, don’t ever assume your quality is fine because few people
   formally complain. Trust me, most people don’t communicate their dis-
   satisfaction to the business. They simply don’t come back for more and
   they tell lots of other people how bad you were . . . and then these people
   tell others as well. The answer of course is to actively invite feedback. (See
   Chapter 6, golden rule 2.)
12   The Financial Times Guide to Business Development




9. Actively strive for consistency
     How often have you commented that a business you have dealt with in the
     past has lost its way and that its overall standards have slipped?

     This is a familiar cry, particularly in the current economic climate where
     many businesses are cutting corners to save cash. It is a business develop-
     ment truth however that ‘standards consistency’ can be achieved with
     limited financial investment if the corporate mindset is correct. In most
     cases it is a product of internal thinking, strong leadership and personal
     commitment from the top. Let me give you one great example of this.


        I have visited a particular hotel many times over the past 12 years . . . The Merton
        Hotel in Jersey. It has always impressed me, not just with its high standards, but
        particularly for the way it has consistently maintained them over the years in the face
        of a very tough economy. While many businesses have fought a losing battle with
        this issue of consistency, the Merton has not let its standards drop. How have they
        done it? I asked their general manager, Michael McInerney, to share his thinking and
        secrets. Here is a sample of what he said:
          ‘If you want consistency, you have to have a consistent team and to do that you
          have to look after your staff and make them feel valued. If you do this they will be
          interested in the business and look after your customers.
          ‘One of the ways we get consistency is through the management team actively
          engaging with customers. Even though it takes extra time, I am a visible and acces-
          sible presence around the hotel. In general terms, management these days seem
          to have lost the art of looking customers in the eye. Because I am always around
          and interacting with people, I regularly pick up feedback about anything that might
          need fixing.’



     Many businesses could learn a lot from this approach. What can you do to
     make your staff feel great about working for you and how can you engage
     more with your customers and clients to get closer to them? (See Chapter
     6 for many examples of this.)



10. Recruitment is part of business development

        A colleague and I were asked to review the way a major package holiday company
        employed and recruited its staff. We had the enlightening experience of sitting in on
        the group interview sessions as it recruited a number of reps who looked after chil-
        dren for their Spanish holidays.
        We encountered during these sessions a very bright and personable young woman
        who spoke fluent Spanish, had lots of relevant experience, the necessary child care
                                  1 ■ The 21 commonsense business development truths           13




      certifications and qualifications and yet she got turned down. At the same time,
      we witnessed other candidates, who were far less appropriate and qualified, being
      offered jobs. We privately asked the HR team carrying out the recruitment why such
      an obviously strong and perfect applicant had been rejected. Their answer was
      astonishing: ‘We don’t have any company uniform blouses that go up to a size 18.
      The only sizes we have are 8 to 16.’



   This is an almost unbelievable example of commercial and business
   insanity. What the company was actually saying was that it would rather
   have less qualified and able people than find a way to get a slightly bigger
   sized item of clothing to be worn as a uniform.

   If you are wondering what the connection is between recruitment and busi-
   ness development, the answer is simple. It is people who deliver your services
   and in most cases sell your products. Get the right people and they will get the
   right business results. Recruit the wrong people for the wrong reasons and this
   will have a negative impact on the quality of everything you want to achieve.

   By the way, within two years this company had crashed!



11. Keep in touch with your existing and past
customers and clients
   Let me ask you a question about your business. When a sale has been made
   or the service or job done, when are you next in touch with the customer or
   client? If you have just answered, ‘we aren’t’ or ‘we don’t know’, then you are
   literally leaving cash on the table and you must do something about this.

   There is a very simple formula to remember. The more often you commu-
   nicate with your customers and clients, the more business you will get from
   them, their families and friends, particularly if you ask them directly for
   what you want. This process of ongoing communication, however, needs
   to be sensitive, tasteful and non-intrusive. (See Chapter 6, golden rule 3.)



12. Master social online media
      The managing partner of a substantial accountancy firm told me recently, ‘I’m fed up
      of hearing, and reading about all this social networking media nonsense. We are a
      serious firm with serious clients. Perhaps I’m just old-fashioned, but at our charging
      rates we don’t have the time to indulge in computer play.’
14   The Financial Times Guide to Business Development




     This gentleman is certainly right about one thing . . . he is old-fashioned!

     Let me be absolutely blunt. Regardless of size or sector, if you are not
     promoting yourself, your business or building relationships, using social
     online media such as LinkedIn, Facebook or Twitter, then you are missing
     out on potential business and allowing your competitors to get a differen-
     tial advantage over you.

     We will be taking a look later on in the book at the potential benefits of
     online social media opportunities for business development, with some
     practical tips about what you should be doing. (See Chapter 7 for more on
     how to use the online world for business development.)



13. Test your ideas, concepts and prices
        A very dynamic, and ambitious, ‘would be’ entrepreneur explained to me recently
        how he got his fingers burnt with what he thought was a project that would make
        his fortune.
        Because he had access to a specialised database, he decided he would send out
        glossy colour mailshots to all 20,000 names on the list at a price he had a positive
        ‘gut feel’ about.
        Actually, he sold just nine of his products at £19 and made a huge loss on the project.




     The moral of this story in business development terms is simple. He didn’t
     test the demand for the product in the market place; he didn’t test the
     quality of his database; he didn’t test the effectiveness of his marketing
     copy; nor did he test his price point. Come to think of it, he didn’t test
     anything at all or do any meaningful planning.

     With big numbers lustfully rolling around in his head, he impatiently
     blasted out what he thought would work to his entire 20,000 database.

     Had he taken his time, he could have ‘split tested’, sending different copy
     at different price points to a small but significant percentage of his data-
     base. He would have almost certainly identified whether there was a market
     for his product, which copy was best and at what price. Had he discovered
     at this stage that nobody wanted his stuff at any price at all, he could have
     quit before losing quite as much as he did.

     Business is not, as some think, about taking wild risks. It is about making
     sensible and sound judgements based on information that is usually avail-
     able. Test as much as you can, so you have as much information as possible.
                                   1 ■ The 21 commonsense business development truths              15




   In this way any risks you take are calculated ones, which then ‘stack the
   odds’ in your favour.



14. Plan, but keep things simple
   Here is part of an introduction from a strategic business development plan.
   Text like this is commonly seen in the business world.

      ‘The interface needs to be transformational and integrated, in order that your cus-
      tomers and stakeholders fully migrate towards the business re-engineering process
      that will be necessary, to gain full exposure and penetration of the demographic.
      This will trigger the internal paradigm shift, which will create greater strategic synergy
      across all external operational functions.’



   Wow, that’s an easy one to get sorted! If any reader understood this please
   e-mail or call me with an explanation and translation, because I certainly
   don’t!

   All too often, plans and the planning process are dressed up to sound more
   complex than they need to be. Ditch the meaningless, vague, pseudo-
   academic business jargon and executive waffle behind plans like this, along
   with anyone who wants to write such stuff for you. Just keep it simple. In prac-
   tice, you should know that your ability to implement a business development
   plan will increase in proportion to the simplicity of the plan and its language.



15. Take complaints seriously
      Many years ago, I was asked to review and make recommendations for potential
      improvements to the complaints handling function of a large package holiday oper-
      ator, which is no longer in business.
      The operator had a huge customer complaints department consisting of around 70
      people, processing thousands of complaints from unhappy holiday makers. Based on
      the corporate perception that all guests were dishonestly inventing or exaggerating prob-
      lems to get some money back, every single complainant was made to feel guilty and
      wait for weeks and sometimes months while their complaint ‘was investigated in resort’.
      The most bizarre thing, however, was that the investigations consistently revealed
      that over 98 per cent of all complaining guests were perfectly honest and telling the
      truth and had justifiable cause to complain.
      The overall cost of this complaints handling operation to the operator in immediate
      financial terms was huge and in terms of long-term damage, the cost was even
      greater as regards goodwill and future possible repeat business.
16   The Financial Times Guide to Business Development




     I’m not suggesting that complaints should not be investigated. Indeed there
     is a massively important quality control element to discovering what is
     behind customer complaints and problems. However, the operator should
     have dealt with the quality control element of its investigations separately
     from the business development objective of maintaining goodwill with its
     customers. Unhappy guests returning from holiday didn’t need to be kept
     waiting months to be told that their complaint was truthful and reason-
     able. A presumption of honesty should have been made immediately, along
     with whatever apology or redress was appropriate.

     The moral of this story is simple. Most customers are honest and you
     should do business with them on the basis of this assumption. Yes, you
     will get ripped off occasionally, but don’t regard customers as guilty until
     proved innocent. It will cost you money, time and ultimately long-term
     damage to your goodwill.

     Why is complaints handling a business development issue? Simple . . . if
     you don’t handle complaints appropriately then not only do you run the
     risk of not getting repeat purchases, but people will stop recommending
     you and will tell lots of other people, not only about the initial complaint
     but about how badly they were dealt with. There is more on this issue in
     Chapter 6, golden rule 2. There you will read about how managing com-
     plaints effectively can actually boost your business.



16. Make your customer or client environment
appropriate

        I had a meeting recently in the lobby and reception area of a four-star hotel, part
        of an international chain. The décor and ambience were perfect for this business
        meeting but for one problem . . . my guest and I couldn’t hear each other because
        of the music. It was 11 am and we were having coffee, but the music being played
        through the sound system would not have been out of place in a Benidorm nightclub.
        I went to reception and politely asked if the music could be turned down. I was told, ‘It
        is management policy for music to be played at this volume. It is there for the benefit
        of all our customers.’
        Now I know I should have just left it at that, but as there were only five other cus-
        tomers in the same area at that time, all trying to have meetings, I actually asked
        them whether they would like the music to stay as it was. Guess what? All the guests
        wanted the music either changed, turned down or better still turned off.
        I conveyed this important bit of market research to the receptionist, but it made no
        difference. We all still had to shout at each other for the duration of our meetings.
                                 1 ■ The 21 commonsense business development truths           17




   This is a prime example of the blatant disregard of customer opinion and
   preferences. I haven’t been there since and I will not be going back. I
   suspect the other customers will avoid this hotel too for fear of going deaf!

   See Chapter 6, golden rule 2 for more.



17. Train your people to spot opportunities

     I recently carried out a simple and informal experiment to see whether businesses
     would pick up on a blatant and obvious business opportunity. I walked into three
     travel agents on a typical high street. Two of them were major multinationals and
     the other a small independent. I simply asked: ‘Do you by any chance have the
     new Fred Olsen Cruise brochure please?’ All of the agencies looked on their display
     shelves and said: ‘We might have some in the back.’ On each occasion, eventually a
     member of staff returned apologising for the fact that they didn’t have that brochure
     at the moment.
     Not one of them offered to take contact details so that they could let me have a bro-
     chure when they did get it in, and nobody thought behind my question and looked
     at me as a potential new cruise customer who might spend several thousands with
     them.
     Despite the fact that they had glossy brochures of various other cruise lines on their
     shelves I was allowed to walk out of their shops without any further conversation or
     questions. I could have been asked, where I might want to cruise and when? It is pos-
     sible that if they had found out about my preferences, they may have had something
     else to offer me then and there.



   How many obvious and simple business opportunities do you or your col-
   leagues miss?



18. Get out of your office or premises and mix
and mingle
   It is an absolute business development truth that a great deal can be
   achieved by fostering and building relationships. Those who find them-
   selves permanently tucked away behind their desks and who never leave
   their premises will always be at a disadvantage.

   Attend conferences and events, visit trade exhibitions, network with
   fellow business professionals and go out of your way to meet innovators,
   commentators and influential people and organisations dictating the
   pace of change. Stop and get to know and meet your competitors, build
   your contact base, get recognised, ask questions, make contributions, get
18   The Financial Times Guide to Business Development




     involved in business and communal activities, and team up with other like-
     minded and compatible businesses and organisations for mutual support.
     Again, much can be achieved via social media.

     See Chapter 8 on how to improve your conversational networking skills.



19. Find a niche and specialise
     If you simply do what the average business in your sector does, in the
     average way, don’t be surprised if you get decidedly average results!

     It is a business development truth that you should strive to be different
     and one very effective way is to specialise in some way or cater for a niche
     aspect of your market.

     Let me give you one of the best examples of this that I have seen.


        I walked past a hairdresser in Radlett, Hertfordshire. It is called ‘Sharkey’s Cuts for
        Kids’ and, unsurprisingly, they specialise mainly in cutting young children’s hair. Let
        me explain. All parents of young children know that taking little ones for a haircut
        can be a challenge. At this hairdresser everything is designed around creating a fun
        experience for children and a less stressful one for the parents. Kids can choose to
        have their hair cut while watching a DVD or TV, or while sitting in one of several fun
        chairs which include a racing car, a pink Barbie Jeep or a Mini Cooper.
        In gaming chairs, kids can play computer games and some of the seats are themed
        like a show business dressing room, complete with lights around the mirrors. The
        ambience is bright and colourful and appropriately themed to appeal to kids. As
        add-ons, they also sell appropriate merchandise, do parents’ hair too, have toilets for
        adults and low ones for children, and have dressing-up parties.
        Strip away all of this packaging and the bottom line is that Sharkey’s is just another
        hairdresser, but by making itself so different and focusing everything on one particular
        niche it sets itself apart and creates a unique and popular experience.




     From a business point of view this is a brilliant business development
     example of how to get a differential advantage over other hairdressers.

     The owners told me that within three weeks of opening they were very
     popular, with parents driving miles with their kids for hair cuts. Proprietor
     Sara Kahn explained, ‘It is being different that makes us stand out.’
                                   1 ■ The 21 commonsense business development truths            19




20. Model what works best
      Some time ago I had a substantial client who told me, unfortunately when it was too
      late to help, how it had launched a television advertising campaign, marketing its ‘No
      Win, No Fee’ personal injury legal service. The client had made a major point of telling
      its producers to avoid what it regarded as the clichéd approach, showing people who
      had been injured talking about how much compensation they had received. The very
      ‘arty’ and creative but meaningless TV ad was produced at great cost, with a number
      of different versions, and then broadcast also at substantial cost.
      The end result was that the client got only 20 enquiries from the campaign instead
      of the 72,000 that another organisation, which used the clichéd approach, achieved.


   While of course it is a virtue to be different and to stand out, it is neverthe-
   less a commonsense business development truth to model what you know
   actually works and then adapt it in terms of strategy, in your own unique
   style, so that it looks and feels different.

   If something has been consistently successful in the past, there is a reason
   for it. Don’t ignore this.



21. Be squeaky clean – you need to be trusted
      Some years ago, I was about to use someone for a particular business service. I had
      discussed a fee with him, part of which was to be payable in advance. Then I got
      his initial bill and an e-mail asking if I would mind if he manipulated the VAT element
      of the payment, so that it would in effect make it better for him and supposedly no
      worse for me.
      I cancelled the job.


   Always remember this. It is a basic business development truth that the
   underlying component of any business transaction is ‘trust’. The moment
   you indicate to an existing or potential customer that you are willing to
   operate outside of standard ethical or legal requirements and norms, you
   are putting any ‘trust’ they may have had in you at risk.
20   The Financial Times Guide to Business Development




        IN SUMMARY
        So to summarise then, here are the 21 commonsense business development truths
        again . . .
         1 Focus your efforts on turning your enquiries into business and not just on
             generating leads.
         2   Exceed customer/client expectations.
         3   Speak to potential customers and clients . . . and speak to them nicely.
         4   Be open for business when your customers or clients want to buy.
         5   Don’t let your administrative process become more important than doing
             business.
         6 There’s no job more important than helping customers or clients part with their
             cash!
         7   Don’t let technology get in the way of doing business.
         8   Quality and word of mouth count for everything.
         9   Actively strive for consistency with your quality standards.
        10   Recruitment is part of business development.
        11   Keep in touch with your existing and past customers and clients.
        12   Master social online media.
        13   Test your ideas, concepts and prices.
        14   Plan – but keep the planning process simple.
        15   Take complaints seriously – trust your customers or clients . . . most of them will
             be honest.
        16   Make your customer or client environment acceptable and appropriate.
        17   Train your people to spot obvious business opportunities.
        18   Get out of your office or premises and mix and mingle.
        19   Find a niche and specialise.
        20   Model what works best.
        21   Be squeaky clean – you need to be trusted in business


     ‘Great things are done by a series of small things brought together.’
                                                                             Vincent Van Gogh
